---
layout: "layouts/page.liquid"
title: "Sharks, open-source, and Social Media"
authorAvatar: "https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/112771657?v=4"
author: "Angel Dollface"
description: "An introduction to the world of the Fediverse."
date: "06/07/2024"
show: "true"
---

## The state of social media platforms

In 2024 humanity is spoiled when it comes to the sheer number of platforms we can communicate over. We have simple messaging services such as WhatsApp, Viber, Discord or full-blown social media platforms with a specific focus such as Facebook, X, Threads, and many others. While these platforms used to be places for people to simply communicate about something or the other and was oftenm restricted to one's own circle of peers, this is no longer the case. These days, most platforms such as Facebook, X, Instagram, and all other corporate-run platforms have become a cesspool of ads, influencers trying to peddle you something, or someone selling you a course on a get-rich-quick scheme. I pass no judgement on this, I am simply stating my subjective perception of these platforms. For some this state of the afore-mentioned platforms could not be any better, they make money, get famous or both. Moving away from the content these platforms hold, there is another key aspect to corporate-owned platforms: Corporations own them and control who can say what on these platforms. Elon Musk said that X is a free-sech platform, but there have been instances of people still getting banned for nebulous reasons. Wouldn't it be nice if there were free platforms that let you say and do whatever you wanted and feature none of the content mentioned above? Enter the Fediverse!

## What the fediverse?

In simple terms, the fediverse is a certain software being run by one individual or multiple individuals on servers they own to give people at large a place to post pictures, discuss things or have a micro-blog. In the case of platforms like Facebook or X, the same holds true, except for the software that is the platform of Facebook is run on Meta's own servers and nobody can just have a look at the source code of Facebook, take it, and put it on their own server to run "Facebook 2". In the Fediverse this is different. The software that is run on servers is free and open-source software (FOSS). Anyone can take this software, modify it or jsut simply install it ont their own server to run it and offer people a social media platform. The fediverse is called "fediverse" because regardless of which software you run on a server, people from other servers that run the same or different software can see the posts and content you have made on a server running Fediverse server. This being able to view content from other platforms is called "federation". One of the most prominent Fediverse platforms is Mastodon. Mastodon is meant to be an open alternative to platforms like X and Threads. There are, however, other Fediverse platforms such as Sharkey, my personal favourite.

## Sharkey

Sharkey is another fediverse software or platform like Mastodon. Sharkey is a modified version of Misskey, which is a modified version of Mastodon. Sharkey is not too widely known. I chose it because I wanted to try something new and was getting a bit exasperated with the endless stream of nonsense I encountered when using X. Some of this nonsense included people posting "hot takes" to jack up their count of followers or some girl promoting her OnlyFans content. I would get the wildest suggestions and never encountered content I found interesting. Most meme pages had stopped posting and the programming content I encountered were another bunch of "hot takes" that were just completely silly. When I changed platforms from X to Sharkey, I faced a question many other now-Fediverse users also encounter: Which instance of Sharkey do I sign up on? While Sharkey is open-source software, meaning anyone can take it, reuse the code, modify the code, etc., people who take Sharkey and install it on their servers for public consumption are called "server admins" or "instance admins" because the act of installing a Fediverse software on your own server(s) is called "creating an instance". To see which Sharkey instances were available, I did a quick google-search and stumbled across the site [fedidb.org](https://fedidb.org). This website features information on all known fediverse platforms, instances running the software and useful such as monthly-active-users and the thematic focus of each instance. Because I found the mascot cute and the instance seemed like a very peaceful place full of kind, like-minded people, I signewd up on [blahaj.zone](https://blahaj.zone). The sign-up process was effortless and setting up my profile was also easy. After haveing been a memeber of this instance for some time, I quickly noticed the difference to the corporate-owned social media sites I had been a member of previously: The content was much more wholesome, the pace of content was much more human-friendly, there were no spammy posts, no bots, and people genuinely interested in having genuine conversations about asll sorts of matters. I liked what I saw and read. However, I was to go deeper, still.

## The plot thickens

Being a person who enjoys telling computers what to do by writing instructions for them in a variety of programming languages, I soon wondered whether Sharkey and, by extension my instance, had some sort of way of interacting with Sharkey programmatically. After looking around a bit and finding unmaintained libraries or ones that didn't work, I decided to peruse the Sharkey API documentation and write my own library to interact with Sharkey programmatically. In case you do not know what an API is, allow me to give you a brioef explanation. When you do any actions on Sharkey (or any other social media site) some command is sent to the software running on the platform's servers. This command is then executed by the soiftware and some data is stored or deleted in a database. A platform's database stores the thousands and millions of messages and media present on a social-media platform. An API allows you to interact with this database by making requests to server to execute a certain action, like liking a post or posting something. I quickly discovered that the documentation of Sharkey's API was virtually non-existent but then remembered that Sharkey is based on Misskey, a similar platform. After finding and reading the Misskey API documentation, I was able to write a library in Typescript and Dart to interact with Sharkey from Deno and Dart. I shall not go into what Deno and Dart are but to say succintly, both are applications that run any code you write in the programming languages of Dart and Typescript. Libraries are code that someone else has written and do one very specific task in a certain programming language. In  my case these programming languages are Typescript and Dart. Both these libraries are also open-source and can be used by anone for interacting with Sharkey. I am telling you about these libraries because after I signed up on [blahaj.zone](https://blahaj.zone), I noticed one problem with Sharkey and the fediverse in general. The two libraries are the foundation for me to fix this problem.

## Minor problems with Sharkey

One of the many ways corporate-owned platforms had pampered me is that they all provided its users with excellent clients for one's mobile device. Shareky does not have any halfway-decenbt clients that users of the platform can install on their respective devices. One can use the website of the instance one is on as a semi-native application but that could trigger a significant loss in battery-life. Because I realized the lack of a client app almost immediately, I wanted to write a client that I and others can use to interact with Sharkey. The libraries I wrote are a foundation for this. The Typescript library was for me to prototype which functions and entities I would need for a potential client and the Dart library was the foundation for a client written in Flutter. Aside from the lack of decent client, my epxerience with Sharkey has been absolutely stellar. This leads me to my closing thoughts and recommendations.

## Conclusion

Wrapping one's head around a new platform can be difficult and have some very real ramifications, based on the people one interacts with on a social media platform. But if you are tired of "traditional" social-media platforms or adventurous like me and want to try something new, I can only recommend signing up on an instance you feel is for you, in that it run s the software that best serves your needs and is as hassle-free for you to use. I was willing to accept the lack of a client because I generally do not spend that much time on the internet and like to take a break of all the platforms I am active on from time to time. Finally, I hope you learned a little bit about the fediverse and enjoyed reading this post. Below are some links that could be helpful. I will attempt to post on this blog every week on Saturday about either practical aspects of creating art or posts about tehcnology that tie in with my own software-development activities.

## Links

- Fedi DB: [Visit](https://fedidb.org)
- Typescript library for Sharkey: [Visit](https://github.com/angeldollface/sharkey.ts)
- Dart library for Sharkey: [Visit](https://github.com/angeldollface/sharkey.dart)
